## p5.crypto - Cryptography services in Phosphorus Five

Although most cryptography features in Phosphorus Five, can be found indirectly, in the p5.mime project -
Some cryptography helper events can be found in this project.

### Creating a cryptographic hash

There are two Active Events in P5 related to creating a hash.

* __[p5.crypto.sha1.hash]__, creates a SHA1 hash of the given data
* __[p5.crypto.sha1.hash-file]__, creates SHA1 hash of the given file
* __[p5.crypto.sha256.hash]__, creates a 256 bits SHA hash of the given data
* __[p5.crypto.sha256.hash-file]__, creates a 256 bits SHA hash of the given file
* __[p5.crypto.sha512.hash]__, creates a 512 bits SHA hash of the given data
* __[p5.crypto.sha512.hash-file]__, creates a 512 bits SHA hash of the given file

Below is an example of how to use them.

```hyperlambda
_hash-data:This string, once hashed, cannot be determined, unless you have the original string
p5.crypto.sha256.hash:x:/-?value
p5.crypto.sha512.hash-file:/web.config
```

The first invocation, will create a 256 bit long SHA of the given data. The second invocation  will create a 512
bit long SHA of the specified file. Hashed values are used in P5, among other things when storing passwords. To
understand how hash values work, and when and how to use them, feel free to check them out at e.g. WikiPedia.
In P5, both of these Active Events, returns the base64 encoded values of the hash created back to caller by default.
But all hash active events also optionally takes a parameters **[raw]**, which will return the bytes as raw bytes -
Or optionally a **[hex]**, which will return the hex values of the hash. The **[raw]** arguments and the **[hex]**
argument, are obviously mutually exclusive.

### Creating acryptographically secured random bytes

When dealing with cryptography, acquiring random numbers is crucial. P5 have one Active Event related to creating
a cryptographically secure random piece of data. This Active Event is called **[p5.crypto.rng.create-bytes]**. Below is an
example of how to use it.

```hyperlambda
p5.crypto.rng.create-bytes
  resolution:10
```

The above invocation, will fill the return value of the invocation node, with 10 bytes of random bytes,
ranging from 0-255. Then it will base64 encode its result, and return to caller. This event also optionally
takes a **[raw]** or a **[hex]** value, declaring what type of return value you wish to retrieve.

Internally this Active Event uses BouncyCastle's SecureRandom implementation. However, the RNG is highly seeded,
to further reduce the likelyhood of that an adversary can somehow _"predict"_ its output. Among other things, the
server salt you supplied during installation of Phosphorus Five is applied, in addition to allowing you to also
optionally seed it yourself, by providing a **[seed]** argument. Notice, your seed and server salt is _added_ to
the existing entropy of BouncyCastle, and not used as an alternative seed.

#### Other types of cryptographically secured random data

In addition, you can also create a cryptographically secure integer, long, or double, by using one of the following
Active Event.

* __[p5.crypto.rng.seed]__ - Seeds the CS RNG generator with your own __[seed]__ value.
* __[p5.crypto.rng.create-integer]__ - Optionally pass in __[min]__ and __[max]__ values.
* __[p5.crypto.rng.create-double]__
* __[p5.crypto.rng.create-long]__

