
## p5.webapp - Your "application pool"

The p5.webapp is not technically a plugin, since it's actually your default website project. It does however
contain some Active Events, which you can find here.

### ViewState

Phosphorus Five doesn't technically contain the construct of _"ViewState"_, since all state is stored on
the server. There are however some events in the system, which arguably from a logical point of view,
functions similar to the ViewState object from ASP.NET. These events obeys by the exact same rules as
any other collection events, from the _"p5.web"_ project, and they can be listed below.

* __[p5.web.viewstate.get]__ - Returns a viewstate object
* __[p5.web.viewstate.set]__ - Sets a viewstate object
* __[p5.web.viewstate.list]__ - Lists all viewstate objects

For a technical understanding of how these events works, please refer to the documentation about the
session object in the _"p5.web"_ section of the documentation.

### Changing the title of your page

The **[p5.web.page.set-title]** event changes the title of your page. To retrieve the title, you can
invoke **[p5.web.page.get-title]**. Below is a snippet that will change your title.

```hyperlambda-snippet
/*
 * Changes your title.
 */
p5.web.page.set-title:Foo bar
```

### Meta tags

As your page is initially loaded, you can add _"meta tags"_ to it, by invoking the **[p5.web.page.add-meta-tag]**
event. Below is an example of usage.

```hyperlambda
/*
 * Add a "keywords" meta tag to your page.
 */
p5.web.page.add-meta-tag
  keywords:"foo, bar, howdy, world"
```

Each argument to this event becomes a key/value HTML attribute for your meta tag.

### Handling application startup

Sometimes you need to be notified when your web server process starts your website. For such
scenarios, you can create a C# event handler named **[.p5.core.application-start]**. This event
will be raised every time your web server process for some reasons is recycled, or your server is
rebooted. You cannot handle this event in Hyperlambda, but if you create a C# Active Event handler,
you can have your handler invoked when this occurs.

For information about how to create a C# event assembly, please refer to the _"Creating your own C# plugins"_
parts of the documentation.

